Docs: Final edits, Style enhancements, Vale checks (#37888)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-oidc-bearer-token-authentication.adoc

Quarkus supports the Bearer token authentication mechanism through the Quarkus OpenID Connect (OIDC) extension.

> The bearer tokens are issued by OIDC and OAuth 2.0-compliant authorization servers, such as link:https://www.keycloak.org[Keycloak].

Reviewer: Hi @sheilamjones, as you confirmed with `currently authenticated` vs `currently-authenticated`, the expression without `-`  should work fine, so I propose to apply a form without `-`, I probably  would not have noticed if it were done as `-` originally, but it does look like the `-` is not used a lot

Author: Thanks @sberyozkin. Both ways are grammatically correct. I shall remove the hyphen again in this instance.

6. The single-page application returns the same data to the Quarkus user.

.Bearer token authentication mechanism in Quarkus with Java or command line client
image::security-bearer-token-authorization-mechanism-2.png[alt=Bearer token authentication, width="60%", align=center]

1. The Quarkus service retrieves verification keys from the OIDC provider.
The verification keys are used to verify the bearer access token signatures.
2. The client uses `client_credentials` that requires client ID and secret or password grant, which requires client ID, secret, username, and password to retrieve the access token from the OIDC provider.
3. The client uses the access token to retrieve the service data from the Quarkus service.
4. The Quarkus service verifies the bearer access token signature by using the verification keys, checks the token expiry date and other claims, allows the request to proceed if the token is valid, and returns the service response to the client.

> If you need to authenticate and authorize users by using OIDC authorization code flow, see the Quarkus xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc[OpenID Connect authorization code flow mechanism for protecting web applications] guide.

Author: Thanks @MichalMaler. The article isn't necessary in this instance as"OIDC authorization code flow" is a concept in itself and can refer to it without an article.

The current tenant's discovered link:https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-discovery-1_0.html#ProviderMetadata[OpenID Connect Configuration Metadata] is represented by `io.quarkus.oidc.OidcConfigurationMetadata` and can be injected or accessed as a `SecurityIdentity` `configuration-metadata` attribute.

The default tenant's `OidcConfigurationMetadata` is injected if the endpoint is public.

[[token-claims-and-security-identity-roles]]
=== Token claims and SecurityIdentity roles

You can map `SecurityIdentity` roles from the verified JWT access tokens as follows:

* If the `quarkus.oidc.roles.role-claim-path` property is set, and matching array or string claims are found, then the roles are extracted from these claims.
  For example, `customroles`, `customroles/array`, `scope`, `"http://namespace-qualified-custom-claim"/roles`, `"http://namespace-qualified-roles"`.
* If a `groups` claim is available, then its value is used.
* If a `realm_access/roles` or `resource_access/client_id/roles` (where `client_id` is the value of the `quarkus.oidc.client-id` property) claim is available, then its value is used.
  This check supports the tokens issued by Keycloak.

> For example, the following JWT token has a complex `groups` claim that contains an array `roles`, which contains roles:

Author: Thank you. Modified this slightly to "For example, the following JWT token has a complex `groups` claim that contains a `roles` array that includes contains roles and their specifications:"
@sberyozkin, does this look okay to you?

}
----

Injection of `JsonWebToken` is supported in `@ApplicationScoped`, `@Singleton`, and `@RequestScoped` scopes.
However, the use of `@RequestScoped` is required if the individual claims are injected as simple types.
For more information, see the xref:security-jwt.adoc#supported-injection-scopes[Supported injection scopes] section of the Quarkus "Using JWT RBAC" guide.

[[user-info]]

> === `UserInfo` JSON objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== `UserInfo`
```

Representation of UserInfo as JsonObject is an implementation detail which should not be in the section title IMHO

Author: Good catch. Thank you for the clarification.

The current tenant's discovered link:https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-discovery-1_0.html#ProviderMetadata[OpenID Connect Configuration Metadata] is represented by `io.quarkus.oidc.OidcConfigurationMetadata` and can be injected or accessed as a `SecurityIdentity` `configuration-metadata` attribute.

The default tenant's `OidcConfigurationMetadata` is injected if the endpoint is public.

[[token-claims-and-security-identity-roles]]
=== Token claims and SecurityIdentity roles

You can map `SecurityIdentity` roles from the verified JWT access tokens as follows:

* If the `quarkus.oidc.roles.role-claim-path` property is set, and matching array or string claims are found, then the roles are extracted from these claims.
  For example, `customroles`, `customroles/array`, `scope`, `"http://namespace-qualified-custom-claim"/roles`, `"http://namespace-qualified-roles"`.
* If a `groups` claim is available, then its value is used.
* If a `realm_access/roles` or `resource_access/client_id/roles` (where `client_id` is the value of the `quarkus.oidc.client-id` property) claim is available, then its value is used.
  This check supports the tokens issued by Keycloak.

> For example, the following JWT token has a complex `groups` claim that contains a `roles` array that includes contains roles and their specifications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following JWT token has a complex `groups` claim that contains a `roles` array that includes roles:
```

Author: Good catch, thank you. Fixed.

    }
}
----
<1> Only requests with OpenID Connect scope `email` will be granted access.
<2> The read access is limited to the client requests with the `orders_read` scope.

For more information about the `io.quarkus.security.PermissionsAllowed` annotation, see the xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#permission-annotation[Permission annotation] section of the "Authorization of web endpoints" guide.

[[token-verification-introspection]]
=== Token verification and introspection

If the token is a JWT token, then, by default, it is verified with a `JsonWebKey` (JWK) key from a local `JsonWebKeySet`, retrieved from the OIDC provider's JWK endpoint.
The token's key identifier (`kid`) header value is used to find the matching JWK key.
If no matching `JWK` is available locally, then `JsonWebKeySet` is refreshed by fetching the current key set from the JWK endpoint.

> You can repeat the `JsonWebKeySet` refresh only after the `quarkus.oidc.token.forced-jwk-refresh-interval` expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`JsonWebKeySet` refresh can be repeated only after the `quarkus.oidc.token.forced-jwk-refresh-interval` expires.
```

The default expiry time is 10 minutes.
If no matching `JWK` is available after the refresh, the JWT token is sent to the OIDC provider's token introspection endpoint.

> If the token is opaque, it can be a binary token or an encrypted JWT token, and it is always sent to the OIDC provider's token introspection endpoint.

Reviewer: I'm not sure `and` works. I think `then` was correctly expressing that the token is only sent for the introspection if it is opaque (as clarified)

<1> Only requests with OpenID Connect scope `email` are going to be granted access.

> <2> The read access is limited to the client requests with scope `orders_read`.

Author: Modified it further slightly to say :
"<2> The read access is limited to the client requests with the `orders_read` scope."

For more information about the `io.quarkus.security.PermissionsAllowed` annotation, see the xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#permission-annotation[Permission annotation] section of the "Authorization of web endpoints" guide.

[[token-verification-introspection]]
=== Token verification and introspection

If the token is a JWT token then, by default, it is verified with a `JsonWebKey` (JWK) key from a local `JsonWebKeySet` retrieved from the OpenID Connect Provider's JWK endpoint.
The token's key identifier (`kid`) header value is used to find the matching JWK key.
If no matching `JWK` is available locally, then `JsonWebKeySet` is refreshed by fetching the current key set from the JWK endpoint.
You can repeat the `JsonWebKeySet` refresh only after the `quarkus.oidc.token.forced-jwk-refresh-interval` expires.
The default expiry time is 10 minutes.
If no matching `JWK` is available after the refresh, the JWT token is sent to the OIDC provider's token introspection endpoint.

> If the token is opaque, it can be a binary token or an encrypted JWT token, and it is always sent to the OIDC provider's token introspection endpoint.

Author: Think the last part of the sentence is part of the description rather than providing non-essential information (per the which clause). As such, I propose to keep this one as it is.

quarkus.oidc.introspection-path=/protocol/openid-connect/tokens/introspect
----

There are advantages and disadvantages to indirectly enforcing the introspection of JWT tokens remotely.

> An advantage is that you eliminate the need for two remote calls: a remote OIDC metadata discovery call followed by another remote call to fetch the verification keys that will not be used.

Author: IMHO, I think the sequence of remote calls might be relevant here. Therefore, I propose to keep "followed by" in the phrase as it indicates which call comes first.

A disadvantage is that you need to know the introspection endpoint address and configure it manually.

The alternative approach is to allow the default option of OIDC metadata discovery but also require that only the remote JWT introspection is performed, as shown in the following example:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url=http://localhost:8180/realms/quarkus
quarkus.oidc.token.require-jwt-introspection-only=true
----

An advantage of this approach is that the configuration is simpler and easier to understand.
A disadvantage is that a remote OIDC metadata discovery call is required to discover an introspection endpoint address even though the verification keys will not be fetched.

The `io.quarkus.oidc.TokenIntrospection`, which is a simple `jakarta.json.JsonObject` wrapper object, will be created.
It can be injected or accessed as a `SecurityIdentity` `introspection` attribute providing either the JWT or opaque token has been successfully introspected.

[[token-introspection-userinfo-cache]]
=== Token introspection and `UserInfo` cache

All opaque and sometimes JWT Bearer access tokens must be remotely introspected.

> If `UserInfo` is also required, the same access token is used to do a remote call to OIDC provider again.

Author: Thank you. Modified it further slightly to the following:
"If `UserInfo` is also required, the same access token is used in a subsequent remote call to the OIDC provider."

A disadvantage is that you need to know the introspection endpoint address and configure it manually.

The alternative approach is to allow the default option of OIDC metadata discovery but also require that only the remote JWT introspection is performed, as shown in the following example:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url=http://localhost:8180/realms/quarkus
quarkus.oidc.token.require-jwt-introspection-only=true
----

An advantage of this approach is that the configuration is simpler and easier to understand.
A disadvantage is that a remote OIDC metadata discovery call is required to discover an introspection endpoint address, even though the verification keys will not be fetched.

The `io.quarkus.oidc.TokenIntrospection`, a simple `jakarta.json.JsonObject` wrapper object, will be created.
It can be injected or accessed as a `SecurityIdentity` `introspection` attribute, providing either the JWT or opaque token has been successfully introspected.

[[token-introspection-userinfo-cache]]
=== Token introspection and `UserInfo` cache

> All opaque and sometimes JWT Bearer access tokens must be remotely introspected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All opaque access tokens must be remotely introspected. Sometimes, JWT access tokens might also have to be introspected.
```

If `UserInfo` is also required, the same access token is used in a subsequent remote call to the OIDC provider.
So, if `UserInfo` is required, and the current access token is opaque, two remote calls are made for every such token; one remote call to introspect the token and another to get `UserInfo`.

> If the token is JWT, only a single remote call, which gets `UserInfo`, is needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the token is JWT, only a single remote call to get `UserInfo` is needed, unless it also has to be introspected.
```

I tried to imply it in the original text with a vague `usually only a single remote call will be needed` but it is not clear at all :-)

> If the token is JWT, only a single remote call is needed to introspect the token and to also get `UserInfo`.

Reviewer: I'd keep the text related to JWT token unchanged (but indeed in a separate sentence), whether to introspect or verify JWT locally is unrelated concept

Author: Thanks @sberyozkin, so to confirm, I will update line 259 and propose to modify slightly to the following:
"If the token is JWT, only a single remote call to get `UserInfo`is needed."

Reviewer: @sheilamjones, Line 258 already says `So, if UserInfo is required,`, I'll do a separate comment

Please experiment with the default cache implementation or register a custom one.

[[jwt-claim-verification]]

> === JSON web token claim verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== JSON Web Token claim verification
```

`JSON Web Token` is a common way to refer to JWT, `JSON web token` reads unusual :-)

Reviewer 2: I've added [JSON Web Token](https://jwt.io/) to our list of proper nouns.

# 'time-to-live' specifies how long a cache entry can be valid for and will be used by a cleanup timer:
quarkus.oidc.token-cache.time-to-live=3M
# 'clean-up-timer-interval' is not set by default, so the cleanup timer can be activated by setting 'clean-up-timer-interval':
quarkus.oidc.token-cache.clean-up-timer-interval=1M
----

The default cache uses a token as a key, and each entry can have `TokenIntrospection`, `UserInfo`, or both.
It will only keep up to a `max-size` number of entries.
If the cache is already full when a new entry is to be added, an attempt is made to find a space by removing a single expired entry.
Additionally, the cleanup timer, if activated, periodically checks for expired entries and removes them.

You can experiment with the default cache implementation or register a custom one.

[[jwt-claim-verification]]
=== JSON web token claim verification

After the bearer JWT token's signature has been verified and its `expires at` (`exp`) claim has been checked, the `iss` (`issuer`) claim value is verified next.

By default, the `iss` claim value is compared to the `issuer` property, which might have been discovered in the well-known provider configuration.

> However, if `quarkus.oidc.token.issuer` property is set then the `iss` claim value is compared to it instead.

Author: Good catch, thank you @MichalMaler.

In some cases, this `iss` claim verification might not work.
For example, if the discovered `issuer` property contains an internal HTTP/IP address while the token `iss` claim value contains an external HTTP/IP address.
Or when a discovered `issuer` property contains the template tenant variable, but the token `iss` claim value has the complete tenant-specific issuer value.

In such cases, consider skipping the issuer verification by setting `quarkus.oidc.token.issuer=any`.
Only skip the issuer verification if no other options are available:

- If you are using Keycloak and observe the issuer verification errors caused by the different host addresses, configure Keycloak with a `KEYCLOAK_FRONTEND_URL` property to ensure the same host address is used.

> - If the `iss` property is tenant-specific in a multitenant deployment, use the `SecurityIdentity` `tenant-id` attribute to check that the issuer is correct in the endpoint itself or the custom Jakarta REST filter.

Author: @sberyozkin, can I confirm that the term here should be "Jakarta REST filter" or "JAX-RS filter"?

}
----

Each OIDC tenant can either permit or deny the storing of its `quarkus.oidc.TokenIntrospection` data, `quarkus.oidc.UserInfo` data, or both with boolean `quarkus.oidc."tenant".allow-token-introspection-cache` and `quarkus.oidc."tenant".allow-user-info-cache` properties.

Additionally, `quarkus-oidc` provides a simple default memory-based token cache, which implements both `quarkus.oidc.TokenIntrospectionCache` and `quarkus.oidc.UserInfoCache` interfaces.

> You can configure and activate the OIDC token cache as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure and activate the default OIDC token cache as follows:
```

}
----

[NOTE]
====
Consider using the `quarkus.oidc.token.audience` property to verify the token `aud` (`audience`) claim value.
====

[[single-page-applications]]
=== Single-page applications

A single-page application (SPA) typically uses `XMLHttpRequest`(XHR) and the JavaScript utility code provided by the OIDC provider to acquire a bearer token to access Quarkus `service` applications.

> For example, you can use `keycloak.js` to authenticate users and refresh the expired tokens from the SPA:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you work with Keycloak, you can use `keycloak.js` to authenticate users and refresh the expired tokens from the SPA:
```

quarkus.oidc.introspection-path=/protocol/openid-connect/tokens/introspect
----

> [[oidc-token-propagation]]

Reviewer: I don't see it anywhere, also, can this break existing external links to this section ?

Author: @sberyozkin, this section was missing an anchor and so I added anchors similar to how they were applied in other sections. As they are not used, I can remove them again. I'm not sure though what existing external links use instead to point to this section.

Reviewer: @sheilamjones Sure, AFAIK, they are only added to support specific links to a given section, otherwise, they are not really necesary I guess

=== Token propagation

For information about bearer access token propagation to the downstream services, see the xref:security-openid-connect-client-reference.adoc#token-propagation[Token propagation] section of the Quarkus "OpenID Connect (OIDC) and OAuth2 client and filters reference" guide.

> [[oidc-provider-authentication]]

Reviewer: Likewise, it is not used, and not clear if the existing links will remain working. `oidc-provider-client-authentication` would be correct in any case as it is about the the quarkus OIDC client code authenticating to the OIDC provider to complete its actions

Author: Removed anchor again, per your guidance.

=== OIDC provider client authentication

`quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcProviderClient` is used when a remote request to an OIDC provider is required.
If introspection of the Bearer token is necessary, then `OidcProviderClient` must authenticate to the OIDC provider.
For more information about supported authentication options, see the  xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#oidc-provider-client-authentication[OIDC provider client authentication] section in the Quarkus "OpenID Connect authorization code flow mechanism for protecting web applications" guide.

[[integration-testing]]
=== Testing

[NOTE]
====

> If you have to test Quarkus OIDC service endpoints that require xref:security-keycloak-authorization.adoc[Keycloak authorization], follow the guidance in the xref:security-keycloak-authorization.adoc#testing[Test Keycloak authorization] section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have to test Quarkus OIDC service endpoints that require xref:security-keycloak-authorization.adoc[Keycloak authorization], follow the xref:security-keycloak-authorization.adoc#testing[Test Keycloak authorization] section.
```

That seems to work too

}
----

The `quarkus-test-oidc-server` extension includes a signing RSA private key file in a `JSON Web Key` (`JWK`) format and points to it with a `smallrye.jwt.sign.key.location` configuration property.
It allows you to sign the token by using a no-argument `sign()` operation.

Testing your `quarkus-oidc` `service` application with `OidcWiremockTestResource` provides the best coverage because even the communication channel is tested against the WireMock HTTP stubs.

> It is anticipated that `OidcWiremockTestResource` will be enhanced in an upcoming release to support more complex bearer token test scenarios.

Reviewer: It makes a specific commitment. I propose to drop this sentence completely

Author: @sberyozkin: Per your suggestion, I will remove this statement.
Just FYI, according to Red Hat guidelines, it is possible to formulate details about a possible future enhancement in this way by using phrasing such as "anticipate" or "expect" and not stating a specific future release.

Reviewer: @sheilamjones Sure, will keep it in mind, as far as `OidcWiremockTestResource` is concerned, I thought, at the time of its creation by the contributor that we'd keep evolving it, we may still do add some bits to it, but since another contribution came to support local wiremocks and enhancing `OidcWiremockTestResource` has become more or less unnecessary with some rare exceptions

> In the meantime, if you need to run a test with WireMock stubs that are not yet supported by `OidcWiremockTestResource`, you can inject a `WireMockServer` instance into the test class, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to run a test with WireMock stubs that are not supported by `OidcWiremockTestResource`, you can inject a `WireMockServer` instance into the test class, as shown in the following example:
```

%test.quarkus.oidc.credentials.secret=secret
----

> To start, add the same dependency, `quarkus-test-oidc-server`, as described in the <<integration-testing-wiremock>> section.

Author: IMHO, I propose to keep this one as it is for clarity.

> Next, write the test code as follows:

Reviewer: It makes it less connected with the prev step IMHO

}
----

This test code acquires a token by using a `password` grant from the test `Auth0` domain, which has registered an application with the client id `test-auth0-client`, and created the user `alice` with password `alice`.
For a test like this to work, the test `Auth0` application must have the `password` grant enabled.
This example code also shows how to pass additional parameters.
For `Auth0`, these are the `audience` and `scope` parameters.

[[integration-testing-keycloak-devservices]]
==== Dev Services for Keycloak

> Use xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak] for integration testing against Keycloak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prefer xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak] for integration testing against Keycloak.
```

`Use` just loses the message IMHO, it makes this option just as a regular alternative.

Author: Thanks for your patience with this one @sberyozkin. What about the following slight modification using the "prefer" verb:
"The preferred approach for integration testing against Keycloak is xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak]."

Reviewer: @sheilamjones Sure, sounds good

}
----

> This test code acquires a token by using a `password` grant from the test `Auth0` domain, which has registered an application with the client id `test-auth0-client`, and created user `alice` with a password `alice`.

Author: @MichalMaler, with regards to changing "id" to "ID" here, Sergey wants to keep "id" in lower case when referring to the "client id". This was also raised in other PRs and discussions with Rolfe and, for consistency, I will keep this instance of "id" in lower case here too. 
Thanks for the catch on the article.

}
----

This test code acquires a token by using a `password` grant from the test `Auth0` domain, which has registered an application with the client id `test-auth0-client`, and created the user `alice` with password `alice`.
For a test like this to work, the test `Auth0` application must have the `password` grant enabled.
This example code also shows how to pass additional parameters.
For `Auth0`, these are the `audience` and `scope` parameters.

[[integration-testing-keycloak-devservices]]
==== Dev Services for Keycloak

> Consider using xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak] for integration testing against Keycloak.

Reviewer: `Consider`  is losing the `recommended` message IMHO

Author: To avoid using "recommended", I could also just say "Use xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak] for integration testing against Keycloak." Would this work?

Author: Yes, our style guides state that we are to avoid using such phrases as "we recommend" or "we suggest" and to instead direct users to _take_ the recommended action and avoid potential user uncertainty. For example, instead of saying "We recommend that you issue the XYZ command.", we should just say "Issue the XYZ command."

Reviewer: Thanks  @sheilamjones, though I'm not sure we need to follow every single guideline, without it, it is just an instruction

}
----

Please see xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak] for more information about the way it is initialized and configured.
For more information about initializing and configuring Dev Services for Keycloak, see the xref:security-openid-connect-dev-services.adoc[Dev Services for Keycloak] guide.

[[integration-testing-keycloak]]
==== KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager
==== `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager`

You can also use `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` for integration testing with Keycloak.

If you need to do some integration testing against Keycloak then you are encouraged to do it with <<integration-testing-keycloak-devservices,Dev Services For Keycloak>>.
Use `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` for your tests only if there is a good reason not to use `Dev Services for Keycloak`.
[IMPORTANT]
====
Where possible, use the method described in <<integration-testing-keycloak-devservices,Dev Services For Keycloak>> instead of using `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager`, unless you have specific requirements for using this method.
====

> Start with adding the following dependency:

Reviewer: Please keep this line or as earlier start with `First, add the following dependency:`

> The following example provides `io.quarkus.test.keycloak.server.KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager`, which is an implementation of `io.quarkus.test.common.QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager` that starts a Keycloak container.

Reviewer: Lines 765-767 change the order somehow, IMHO the original order is correct

Author: I moved this line back to the original location (after the code snippet) and instead of saying "This example provides", I changed it to "It provides...."

testImplementation("io.quarkus:quarkus-test-keycloak-server")
----

> which provides `io.quarkus.test.keycloak.server.KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` - an implementation of `io.quarkus.test.common.QuarkusTestResourceLifecycleManager` which starts a Keycloak container.

Reviewer: Please keep it but if you'd like, start with `It provides` instead of `which provides`

            .when().get("/api/users/preferredUserName")
            .then()
            .statusCode(200)
            // The test endpoint returns the name extracted from the injected SecurityIdentity Principal
            .body("userName", equalTo("alice"));
    }

}
----

.Summary

In the provided example, `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` registers two users: `alice` and `admin`.
By default:
* The user `alice` has the `user` role, which you can customize by using a `keycloak.token.user-roles` system property.
* The user `admin` has both the `user` and `admin` roles, which you can customize by using the `keycloak.token.admin-roles` system property.

By default, `KeycloakTestResourceLifecycleManager` uses HTTPS to initialize a Keycloak instance, and this can be disabled by using `keycloak.use.https=false`.
The default realm name is `quarkus`, and the client id is `quarkus-service-app`.
If you want to customize these values, set the `keycloak.realm` and `keycloak.service.client` system properties.

[[integration-testing-public-key]]

> ==== Using a local public key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Local public key
```

We don't use `using` in other options

> You can use a local inline public key for testing your `quarkus-oidc` `service` applications, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: `inline` is not correct in this context I believe

Author: @sberyozkin: Can you help clarify what is meant by "inlined" (versus "inline"). Vale is throwing a warning for "inlined" and it is not in the Merriam-Webster dictionary either.  From my understanding of the context, would it be correct to say "You can use a local public key inline for testing your.........applications,....."  (just move the placement of "inline" in the sentence?

smallrye.jwt.sign.key.location=/privateKey.pem
----

To generate JWT tokens, copy `privateKey.pem` from the `integration-tests/oidc-tenancy` in the `main` Quarkus repository and use a test code similar to the one in the preceding <<integration-testing-wiremock>> section.
You can use your own test keys, if preferred.

This approach provides limited coverage compared to the WireMock approach.
For example, the remote communication code is not covered.

[[integration-testing-security-annotation]]
==== TestSecurity annotation

> You can use `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations to test the `service` application endpoint code that depends on the injected `JsonWebToken`, `UserInfo`, `OidcConfigurationMetadata`, or all three.

Author: @sberyozkin, in the OIDC  code flow authentication topic, for this section we made some changes. For consistency, shall I also update this section to the following: (but replacing `web-app` application with `service` application)?
"You can use @TestSecurity and @OidcSecurity annotations to test the `service`application endpoint code, which depends on either one, or all four, of the following injections:

Reviewer: @sheilamjones, sure, please do it, (it is only 3 injections in this case)

smallrye.jwt.sign.key.location=/privateKey.pem
----

To generate JWT tokens, copy `privateKey.pem` from the `integration-tests/oidc-tenancy` in the `main` Quarkus repository and use a test code similar to the one in the preceding <<integration-testing-wiremock>> section.
You can use your own test keys, if preferred.

This approach provides limited coverage compared to the WireMock approach.
For example, the remote communication code is not covered.

[[integration-testing-security-annotation]]
==== TestSecurity annotation

> You can use `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations to test the `service` application endpoint code that depends on the injected `JsonWebToken` and `UserInfo` and `OidcConfigurationMetadata`.

Author: @sberyozkin: According to guidelines, we should avoid using "and/or". I updated the phrase though to remove "and". What about the following:
You can use `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations to test the `service` application endpoint code that depends **on the injected `JsonWebToken`, `UserInfo`, `OidcConfigurationMetadata`, or all three.**

> You can use `@TestSecurity` and `@OidcSecurity` annotations to test the `service` application endpoint code that depends on the injected `JsonWebToken` and `UserInfo` and `OidcConfigurationMetadata`.

Reviewer: @sheilamjones Sure, thanks

> To do so, add the following dependency:

Reviewer: In at least 1 section above, and one suggestion, it is `First, add ...` so lets either use `First, add` or just `Add`

Author: Good point. Updated to "First, add....." for consistency.

}
----

> In the previous test code example, the `ProtectedResource` class might look like the following code snippet:

Reviewer: `where` is a typical follow up when some code needs clarifications

Author: Updated per your following suggestion for this line to say "The `ProtectedResource` class which is used in this code example might look like this:"

}
----

> [NOTE]

Reviewer: I'm not sure just because the text contains a `Note` it has to be turned into a dedicated note...

Author: @sberyozkin I changed it so that it is not a dedicated note, if you prefer. I modified the language slightly though to be more direct. Please see updated section.

====

> The `@TestSecurity` annotation must always be used, and its `user` property must be returned as `JsonWebToken.getName()` and its `roles` property returned as `JsonWebToken.getGroups()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@TestSecurity` annotation must always be used. Its `user` property is returned as `JsonWebToken.getName()` and its `roles` property is returned as `JsonWebToken.getGroups()`.
```

The `@OidcSecurity` annotation is optional and can be used to set the additional token claims and the `UserInfo` and `OidcConfigurationMetadata` properties.
Additionally, if the `quarkus.oidc.token.issuer` property is configured, it will be used as an `OidcConfigurationMetadata` `issuer` property value.
====

> If you work with opaque tokens, you can test them by using the following code example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you work with opaque tokens, you can test them as shown in the following code example:
```

}
----

> In the previous test code example, the  `ProtectedResource` class might look similar to the following code example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ProtectedResource` class which is used in this code example might look like this:
```

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.log.category."io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcRecorder".level=TRACE
quarkus.log.category."io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcRecorder".min-level=TRACE
----

=== External and internal access to OIDC providers

The externally-accessible token of the OIDC provider and other endpoints might have different HTTP(S) URLs compared to the URLs that are auto-discovered or configured relative to the `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` internal URL.
For example, suppose your SPA acquires a token from an external token endpoint address and sends it to Quarkus as a bearer token.
In that case, the endpoint might report an issuer verification failure.

In such cases, if you work with Keycloak, start it with the `KEYCLOAK_FRONTEND_URL` system property set to the externally-accessible base URL.
If you work with other OIDC providers, refer to your provider's documentation.

[[using-client-id]]
=== Using the `client-id` property

The `quarkus.oidc.client-id` property identifies the OIDC client that requested the current bearer token.

> The client requester can be an SPA application running in a browser or a Quarkus `web-app` confidential client application propagating the access token to the Quarkus `service` application.

Author: Thanks @MichalMaler, however, "an SPA" is correct here because "SPA" is pronounced as a single word that starts with a vowel sound. Therefore "an" is correct before this vowel sound.

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.log.category."io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcRecorder".level=TRACE
quarkus.log.category."io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcRecorder".min-level=TRACE
----

=== External and internal access to OIDC providers

The externally-accessible token of the OIDC provider and other endpoints might have different HTTP(S) URLs compared to the URLs that are auto-discovered or configured relative to the `quarkus.oidc.auth-server-url` internal URL.
For example, suppose your SPA acquires a token from an external token endpoint address and sends it to Quarkus as a bearer token.
In that case, the endpoint might report an issuer verification failure.

In such cases, if you work with Keycloak, start it with the `KEYCLOAK_FRONTEND_URL` system property set to the externally-accessible base URL.
If you work with other OIDC providers, refer to your provider's documentation.

[[using-client-id]]
=== Using the `client-id` property

The `quarkus.oidc.client-id` property identifies the OIDC client that requested the current bearer token.

> The client requester can be an SPA application running in a browser or a Quarkus `web-app` confidential client application propagating the access token to the Quarkus `service` application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OIDC client can be an SPA application running in a browser or a Quarkus `web-app` confidential client application propagating the access token to the Quarkus `service` application.
```

quarkus.oidc.token.audience=${quarkus.oidc.client-id}
----

If you set `quarkus.oidc.client-id`, but your endpoint does not require remote access to one of the OIDC provider endpoints (introspection, token acquisition, and so on), do not set a client secret with `quarkus.oidc.credentials` or similar properties because it will not be used.

[NOTE]
====
Quarkus `web-app` applications always require the `quarkus.oidc.client-id` property.
====

> == Authentication after HTTP request has completed

Author: Not sure if an article is needed here. If so, propose to change to "a" instead of "the"
@sberyozkin: Would the following update be correct for this title: "Authentication after a HTTP request has completed"

Sometimes, `SecurityIdentity` for a given token must be created when there is no active HTTP request context.
The `quarkus-oidc` extension provides `io.quarkus.oidc.TenantIdentityProvider` to convert a token to a `SecurityIdentity` instance.

> For example, one situation when you must verify the token after HTTP request has completed is when you are

Reviewer: @sheilamjones I guess either form can work, I'll let you decide :-)

quarkus.oidc.token.audience=${quarkus.oidc.client-id}
----

If you set `quarkus.oidc.client-id`, but your endpoint does not require remote access to one of the OIDC provider endpoints (introspection, token acquisition, and so on), do not set a client secret with `quarkus.oidc.credentials` or similar properties because it will not be used.

[NOTE]
====
Quarkus `web-app` applications always require the `quarkus.oidc.client-id` property.
====

> == Authentication after a HTTP request has completed

Reviewer: This `a` reads unusual, may be lets do `an`  ?
